This morning, as usual, I woke up and kick started my search on the vast internet to see something new, you know something really interesting. I clicked on this video titled ‘A toddler waiting for the beat to drop’, and that one minute was extremely delightful. I want you to have a look….


This left me into a deep thought, how come that little kid’s brain see that drop coming. So, I started looking out again on the very vast internet for my answer. I read some articles, referred to some research papers and saw some TED talks, my ultimate savior. Actually, there has a been a lot of research on the anticipation for the DROP.

Meet Valorie Salimpoor, a neuroscientist at the Rotman Research Institute in Toronto. According to her, some recent developments in brain-imaging technology have made it possible for scientists to see what’s going on inside the brain when we listen to music. They use some high end simulations, that can precisely depict which part of our brain excites while we hear music.

What Salimpoor and her colleagues found is that “Music is connected to the emotion and pleasure centres in the brain, as well as the motor areas, responsible for movement”. Which, put simply, music is all about anticipation and climax, and our brains respond to it in a similar way. “Whether you’re at a nightclub or you’re in your car, when you hear the first few seconds of a song that you really, really like, all of a sudden you just get this intense excitement because you know that the part that you like is coming up,” says Salimpoor. Ohh, I see.



During this anticipation, our brains release dopamine (a hormone secreted as a result of excitement), causing a rush of euphoria also known as a natural high. “Music is obviously not a chemical substance that you’re ingesting,” observes Salimpoor, “It’s entirely abstract. It’s just fleeting sounds. And if you think about it, what is music? Music is really just a bunch of sounds; and each of these sounds individually isn’t considered pleasurable, but then when you put them together in some kind of sequence or pattern – as DJs and composers do – your brain then tries to interpret these patterns, and experiences as a rush, or a high when you’re listening to them.”

Oh and by the way, just listening to the drop by itself without the build up, won’t give you that dopamine hit. “Think about your top ten favourite pieces of music and there’s probably one section in there that you really, really like and if you take that, the 10 seconds around it and then just listen to that again and again, there’s nothing really exciting about that because there’s no anticipation and build up. You’re just listening to the climax and what was the point of that?!,” says Salimpoor.

Thanks a lot Mam.
